Maintenance documentation (#12490)
kata-containers/kata-containers: docs/Maintenance.md

help users understand the classification of each components.

## Levels of Support

We have five categories of maintenance/support:

1. Supported: Actively maintained by assigned or paid contributor(s), has updated documentation, upstream CI
  to test behaviour and ensure it stays stable
1. Best effort: Either limited availability from maintainers, lack of support on certain environments,
  missing/outdated documentation, or lacking CI tests to ensure its stability
1. Not maintained: No current maintainers, but the community is open to receive them. May be moved into deprecated
1. Experimental: A new(ish) feature that hasn't reached maturity yet. Not recommended for use
1. Deprecated: Deprecated and unsupported. Recommended to move away from it. Might have a date/release target for removal

## Becoming a maintainer

To become a maintainer, first become a [committer](https://github.com/kata-containers/community/blob/main/README.md#committer)
and then volunteer to join the maintainer team for one, or more features. Reach out to the Kata Containers
Architecture Committee, or other admins to be added to, or removed from teams.

## Support classification

> *Note: GitHub teams may need updating*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| "Feature" | Support State | Maintainers | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Architectures** | |  | |
| amd64 | Supported | [@kata-containers/arch-amd64](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-amd64) | |
| s390x | Supported | [@kata-containers/arch-s390x](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-s390x) | s390x only works with the qemu hypervisor and not all features are supported on this platform. |
| arm64 (aarch64) | Best effort | [@kata-containers/arch-aarch64](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-aarch64) | arm64 only works with the qemu hypervisor and not all features are supported on this platform. Limit CI runners. |
| ppc64le | Best effort | [@kata-containers/arch-ppc64le](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-ppc64le) | ppc64le only works with the qemu hypervisor and not all features are supported on this platform. ppc64le doesn't currently support the runtime-rs runtime. Limit CI runners for e2e tests. |
| risc-v | Experimental | [@kata-containers/arch-riscv](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-riscv) | Still WIP, not all components buildable, No reliable CI |

> | darwin | Best effort? | [@kata-containers/arch-darwin](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-darwin) | Currently has limited testing to build a few runtime packages (unmaintained) and genpolicy (which Markus maintains). Drop testing of runtime and just focus on developer tools |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| darwin | Best effort | [@kata-containers/arch-darwin](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-darwin) | Only for developer tools (`genpolicy`), the Darwin runtime is unmaintained.  |
```

| Intel TDX | Supported | [@kata-containers/intel-tdx](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/intel-tdx) | The project has CI and active maintainers, but limited CI runners. |
| AMD SEV-SNP | Best effort | [@kata-containers/amd-snp](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/amd-snp) | The project has CI and active development, but no active maintainers. |
| ARM CCA | Experimental | [@kata-containers/arch-aarch64](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-aarch64) | Very limited code currently |
| | | | |
| **Hypervisors** | | | |
| qemu | Supported | [@kata-containers/qemu](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/qemu) | Widely supported across all architectures and multiple TEEs |
| dragonball | Best effort | [@kata-containers/dragonball](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/dragonball) | Not actively developed. Only supported with runtime-rs on amd64 architecture |

> | cloud-hypervisor | Not maintained | [@kata-containers/cloud-hypervisor](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/cloud-hypervisor) | No currently identified maintainers |

Reviewer 2: Just added maintainers to this team

Author: Thanks - I've updated to supported now

| firecracker | Not maintained | [@kata-containers/firecracker](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/firecracker) | Some development, but limited to the go runtime. No CI testing |
| remote | Not maintained | | Remote hypervisor with an active implementation in [cloud-api-adaptor](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor). No Kata CI, no testing for runtime-rs |
| | | | |
| **Tools** | | | |
| genpolicy | Supported | [@kata-containers/genpolicy](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/genpolicy) | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |
| kata-deploy | Supported | [@kata-containers/kata-deploy](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/kata-deploy) | Tested in the CI on all supported platforms |
| agent-ctl | Not maintained | | Some CI testing. No maintainers |
| kata-ctl | Not maintained | | Meant as a replacement of kata-runtime. No CI testing or maintainers |
| kata-manager | Deprecated | | No CI testing. Better to re-write using "deploy-rs" code if we want to support non-k8s deployments |

> | kata-monitor | Not maintained | [@kata-containers/observability](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/observability)* | |

Reviewer: The team does not exist yet. As long as we don't have an initial roster, I'd remove it from here.

| kata-runtime | Deprecated | | No CI testing. To be replaced by kata-ctl. |
| log-parser | Deprecated | | No CI testing. To be replaced by kata-ctl's log-parse implementation. |
| trace-forwarder | Deprecated | | No CI testing. Long term CVEs |
| vsock-exporter | Deprecated | | No maintainers, no testing? Has CVEs |
| | | | |
| **Rootfs base Operating System** | | | |
| ubuntu | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on all platforms |

> | cbl-mariner | Supported | | Tested in the CI on all x86 |

Reviewer: Should the supported OSes have maintainer teams?

| alpine | Deprecated and remove before 4.0? | | No CI testing |
| centos | Deprecated and remove before 4.0? | | No CI testing |

> | debian | Deprecated and remove before 4.0? | | No CI testing |

Reviewer: Did we remove these?

| | | | |
| **Tests** | | | |
| Build checks | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on all platforms |
| cri-containerd tests | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |

> | K8s tests | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |

Reviewer: Same question here, should the supported tests have teams?

| Basic-CI | Deprecated | | No CI testing |
| Containerd-sandbox API | Not maintained | | No identified maintainers |
| Containerd stability | Not maintained | | CI testing on multiple platforms, but not updated |
| nydus | Best effort? | | CI testing on multiple platforms, but not updated |
| nerdctl | Not maintained | | No identified maintainers |
| darwin tests | Not maintained | | Not maintained |
| kata-monitor tests | Not maintained | | Not maintained |
| docker tests | Not maintained | | No identified maintainers |

> | static checks | Deprecated? | | Not maintained, a huge file with many tests, some of which have value. Should be reviewed and split up? |

Reviewer: So, label as `not maintained` and hope that someone starts the splitting?

> | kata-monitor tests | Deprecated? | | Not maintained. Only running against crio with qemu |

Reviewer 3: This has been updated, and although I am not the maintainer, I got it tested with containerd + QEMU, supporting both go and rust runtime.

| runtime-rs (Rust) | Supported | [@kata-containers/runtime-rs](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/runtime-rs) | |
| | | | |
| **Container Runtime Integrations** | | | |
| Containerd | Supported | | Extensive CI across multiple platforms and with two containerd versions (LTS, Active). |
| Kubeadm | Supported | | Extensive CI across multiple platforms |
| AKS | Supported | | Extensive CI across x86 |
| k0s | Not maintained | | Only CI testing of install with kata-deploy |
| rke2 | Not maintained | | Only CI testing of install with kata-deploy |
| `microk8s` | Not maintained | | Only CI testing of install with kata-deploy |
| k3s | Not maintained | | Only CI testing of install with kata-deploy |
| CRI-O | Deprecated? | [@kata-containers/cri-o](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/cri-o) | Tests disabled in CI as of 2024. Minimal recent maintenance. Documentation exists but no active support |
| | | | |

## Doc TODOs

- Create groups for features we want to maintain

> - Do we want to use the CODEOWNER/MAINTAINER file to document these rather than this page?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Let's create the groups now and defer the CODEOWNERS discussion.

# Support & Maintenance Levels for Kata Containers Features

## Introduction

Maintainers/Committers are vital to any open-source projects vitality and that is the same for Kata Containers.
Within the project we have code for many components, features and platforms, but not all of these have the
same level of support. This document aims to outline our maintenance levels of components in Kata Containers, so
help users understand what the classification of components means.

## Levels of Support
We have six categories of maintenance/support:

1. Supported: Actively maintained by assigned or paid contributor(s), has updated documentation, upstream CI
to test behaviour and ensure it stays stable
1. Best-effort: Either limited availability from maintainers, lack of support on certain environments,
missing/outdated documentation, or lacking CI tests to ensure its stability
1. Not maintained: No current maintainers, but the community is open to receive them. May be moved into deprecated
1. Experimental: A new(ish) feature that hasn't reach maturity yet. Not recommended for use
1. Deprecated: Deprecated and unsupported. Recommended to move away from it. Likely to be removed

> 1. Obsolete: To be removed.

Reviewer: Should we just merge deprecated and removed into?

> Deprecated: No longer supported and scheduled for removal.

Author: That's fair - I guess the distinction I had was that Obsolete had a date to be removed (ideally before 4.0) and deprecated might not, but we could have a planned obsolescence as part of the deprecation criteria. I will update this. Thanks

| kata-runtime | Deprecated | | No CI testing. To be replaced by kata-ctl. |
| log-parser | Deprecated | | No CI testing. To be replaced by kata-ctl's log-parse implementation. |
| trace-forwarder | Obsolete? | | No CI testing. Long term CVEs |
| vsock-exporter | Obsolete? | | No mainainers, no testing? Has CVEs |
| |
| **Rootfs base Operating System** | | | |
| ubuntu | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on all platforms |
| cbl-mariner | Supported | | Tested in the CI on all x86 |
| alpine | Obsolete? | | No CI testing |
| centos | Obsolete? | | No CI testing |
| debian | Obsolete? | | No CI testing |
| |
| **Tests** | | | |
| Build checks | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on all platforms |
| cri-containerd tests | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |
| K8s tests | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |
| CoCo Stability | Obsolete? | | Not maintained and disabled for 7 months |
| Basic-CI | Obsolete? | | No CI testing |
| Containerd-sandbox API | Experimental | | No CI testing. Blocked by https://github.com/containerd/containerd/issues/11640 |
| Containerd stability | Not maintained | | CI testing on multiple platforms, but not updated |

> | nydus | Best effort? | | CI testing on multiple platforms, but not updated |

Reviewer 4: I think `Best effort` is fine

Reviewer: Should we create a team?

## Levels of Support
We have six categories of maintenance/support:

1. Supported: Actively maintained by assigned or paid contributor(s), has updated documentation, upstream CI
to test behaviour and ensure it stays stable
1. Best-effort: Either limited availability from maintainers, lack of support on certain environments,
missing/outdated documentation, or lacking CI tests to ensure its stability
1. Not maintained: No current maintainers, but the community is open to receive them. May be moved into deprecated
1. Experimental: A new(ish) feature that hasn't reach maturity yet. Not recommended for use
1. Deprecated: Deprecated and unsupported. Recommended to move away from it. Likely to be removed
1. Obsolete: To be removed.

## Becoming a maintainer

To become a maintainer, first become a [committer](https://github.com/kata-containers/community/blob/main/README.md#committer)
and then volunteer to join the maintainer team for one, or more features. Reach out to the Kata Containers
Architecture Committee, or other admins to be added to, or removed from teams.

## Support classification
*Note: github teams may need updating*

> | "Feature" | Support State | Maintainers | Notes |

Reviewer: What I didn't find on the list, but would be a candidate for removal:

* https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/blob/bd6377a038ab219073269258777519f70c308925/docs/design/direct-blk-device-assignment.md
* virtio-pmem

Reviewer: direct-blk-device-assignment is just best effort or unmaintained, not deprecated, but I heard that @fidencio might want to deprecate virtio-pmem.

Reviewer: kata-webhook: unmaintained, but I'd prefer deprecated.

https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/tree/main/tools/testing/kata-webhook

Reviewer 5: > kata-webhook: unmaintained, but I'd prefer deprecated.
> 
> https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/tree/main/tools/testing/kata-webhook

The webhook is used by the CI that @ldoktor maintain, and when needed we do some fixes. This is a piece of software is stable, don't need much maintenance. It is tested indirectly by the  the mentioned CI. Could we make it actually "best effort" or maybe maintained (and assign me as maintainer).

Reviewer: This tool is completely unrelated to Kata, except for the runtime class name it applies, or am I missing something? Why is this not part of said CI infra instead?

Reviewer 6: The webhook was there when I joined and "they said" it was written as an example on how to consume kata. The CI that consumes it also lives in kata https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/tree/main/ci/openshift-ci so IMO it makes sense to keep it in the tools, but I'm fine with whatever location, but I'd like to keep it as part of the kata project. I do plan to address any future issues if needed.

| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Architectures** | |  ||
| amd64 | Supported | [@kata-containers/arch-amd64](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-amd64) | |
| s390x | Supported | [@kata-containers/arch-s390x](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-s390x) | s390x only works with the qemu hypervisor and not all features are supported on this platform. |
| arm64 (aarch64) | Best-effort | [@kata-containers/arch-aarch64](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-aarch64) | arm64 only works with the qemu hypervisor and not all features are supported on this platform. Limit CI runners. |
| ppc64le | Best-effort | [@kata-containers/arch-ppc64le](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-ppc64le) | ppc64le only works with the qemu hypervisor and not all features are supported on this platform. ppc64le doesn't currently support the runtime-rs runtime. Limit CI runners for e2e tests. |
| risc-v | Experimental | [@kata-containers/arch-riscv](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/arch-riscv) | Still WIP, not all components buildable, No reliable CI |

> | darwin | Deprecated? | | Limited testing to build a few runtime packages and genpolicy (which Markus maintains)?|

Reviewer: If we don't have maintainers for darwin virtualization anymore, I'd suggest to remove the runtime parts (or at least not port them to runtime-rs), and focus on darwin support for developer tools, like genpolicy.

| firecracker | Not maintained | [@kata-containers/firecracker](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/firecracker) | Some development. No CI testing |
| remote | Not maintained | | Remote hypervisor with an active implementation in [cloud-api-adaptor](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor). No Kata CI, no support for runtime-rs |
| |
| **Tools** | | | |
| genpolicy | Supported | [@kata-containers/genpolicy](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/genpolicy) | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |
| kata-deploy | Supported | [@kata-containers/kata-deploy](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/kata-deploy) | Tested in the CI on all supported platforms |
| agent-ctl | Not maintained | | Some CI testing |
| kata-ctl | Not maintained | | Meant as a replacement of kata-runtime. No CI testing or maintainers |
| kata-manager | Deprecated | | No CI testing. Better to re-write using "deploy-rs" code if we want to support non-k8s deployments |

> | kata-monitor | Not maintained | [@kata-containers/observability](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/observability)* | **Only works with Go runtime** CI tests pass regularly (CRI-O + QEMU + Go runtime). Containerd tests disabled (issue #9761). See issue #12666 for runtime-rs support roadmap |

Reviewer: I'm fascinated by the CRI-O test still passing, even though CRI-O testing itself is switched off. https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/actions/runs/24277955641/job/70899742548  Is that plausible?

Author: Yeah - it suggests that the kata-monitor tests aren't particularly rigorous. I did have team as deprecated/obselete, but Wainer said that RH wanted to support them (and created the issue for runtime-rs port)

> | kata-monitor | Deprecated? | | Limited CI testing |

Reviewer: kata-monitor is duplicated here.

| |
| **Rootfs base Operating System** | | | |
| ubuntu | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on all platforms |
| cbl-mariner | Supported | | Tested in the CI on all x86 |
| alpine | Obsolete | | No CI testing |
| centos | Obsolete | | No CI testing |
| debian | Obsolete | | No CI testing |
| |
| **Tests** | | | |
| Build checks | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on all platforms |
| cri-containerd tests | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |
| K8s tests | Supported |  | Tested in the CI on multiple platforms |
| CoCo Stability | Obsolete? | | Not maintained and disabled for 7 months |
| Basic-CI | Obsolete? | | No CI testing |
| Containerd-sandbox API | Experimental | | No CI testing. Blocked by https://github.com/containerd/containerd/issues/11640 |
| Containerd stability | Not maintained | | CI testing on multiple platforms, but not updated |
| nydus | Best effort? | | CI testing on multiple platforms, but not updated |
| run-tracing | Obsolete? | | Not maintained. CI disabled for over 18 months |
| run-vfio | Obsolete? | | Not maintained. CI disabled for over 18 months |
| nerdctl | Not maintained | | Not maintained. CI runs against multiple hypervisors |

> | darwin tests | Not maintained | | Not maintained. CI runs against multiple hypervisors |

Reviewer: Maintained by me. We should probably create a darwin team.

Author: I've create the darwin team and tried to clarify

Reviewer: I don't see a darwin team, are you sure you created it?

Author: Yeah - the link works and you are a/the member:
<img width="1046" height="316" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/be60b6bb-e5da-4c1c-8f47-c9bb9d043799" />

Reviewer: Sorry, missed the prefix.

| docs url alive check | Obsolete | | Not maintained. Never passed on github |
| metrics tests | Obsolete | | Not maintained. Test runner not available |
| kata-monitor tests | Deprecated? | | Not maintained. Only running against crio with qemu |

> | docker tests | Not maintained | | Not maintained. Not working for many months |

Reviewer: Is working again, but still not maintained (or best effort at most): https://github.com/kata-containers/kata-containers/actions/runs/24277955641/job/70899742516

> | static checks | Deprecated? | | Not maintained, a huge file with many tests, some of which have value. Should be reviewed and split up? |

Reviewer: I'd argue that this is maintained, and I don't believe it will go away in the foreseeable future.

Author: So I'm specifically talking about the static-checks.sh script which no-one generally touches apart from workarounds, which is the candidate to break up into smaller, better chunks - like I did with replacing the complicated spell check with a "off-the-shelf" cspell action. I think there are lots of opportunities to do that here like hadolint, license headers, go mod vendoring?

Reviewer: Oh, I missed that gem and thought it's about the workflow. Nevermind then.

| Physical (SR-IOV) | Supported | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | VFIO passthrough with hot-plug support added 2023. Primary contributor: Intel |
| MACVTAP | Deprecated | | Legacy implementation. No hot-plug support. TC-filter preferred |
| VHOST-USER | Best-effort | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | Cold-plug only. No hot-plug support. Use case: OVS-DPDK, VPP |
| VFIO (DAN) | Experimental | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | Direct Assigned Network. Added 2024. No hot-plug support yet. Primary contributor: NVIDIA |
| |
| **Security & Attestation** | SH: I'm not sure if this section makes sense to call out here? | | |
| Policy Enforcement (kata-opa) | Supported | [@kata-containers/security](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/security)* | OPA-based policy engine. 8 test suites in CI. Comprehensive documentation. Contributors: IBM, Intel, ARM |

> | Genpolicy | Supported | [@kata-containers/genpolicy](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/genpolicy) | Auto-policy generation tool. Multi-platform CI. Active development for GPU, CronJob, etc. Contributors: Microsoft, Edgeless Systems, IBM |

Reviewer: Maybe I'm misunderstanding this, but afaik `src/kata-opa` is home to three default policy files and that's about it. For this list here, we should probably fold that dir, the `src/agent/policy` crate and the `genpolicy` tool into one maintained feature. cc @danmihai1

| Overlay filesystem | Supported | [@kata-containers/storage](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/storage)* | Standard for container layering. Implicitly tested in all container workflows |
| Device Mapper | Best-effort | [@kata-containers/storage](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/storage)* | Block device snapshotter. Disabled by default (`disable_block_device_use = true`). Minimal CI testing |
| virtio-9p | Deprecated | | Legacy filesystem sharing. No CI testing. Maintained for backward compatibility only |
| |
| **Networking** | | | |
| VETH | Supported | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | Default network endpoint type. Full hot-plug support. Rate limiting supported. Contributors: Intel, IBM |
| TAP / TUNTAP | Supported | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | Hot-plug scenarios. Vhost-net configurable. Contributors: Intel, IBM |
| MACVLAN / IPVLAN | Supported | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | Full support with TC-filter interworking model. Hot-plug supported. Contributors: Intel, IBM |

> | Physical (SR-IOV) | Supported | [@kata-containers/networking](https://github.com/orgs/kata-containers/teams/networking)* | VFIO passthrough with hot-plug support added 2023. Primary contributor: Intel |

Reviewer 4: We also need add AlibabaCloud and AntGroup into the contributors list
